About The Project

Project Name: "Real Time Masked Face Detection"

Project Statement: During this COVID-19 Pandemic wearing a face mask is mandatory. So, it will be difficult and time consuming 
                   for a person to manually identify the people who are wearing face mask in a crowd.
                   This project is to identify the people who are wearing face mask and who are not wearing face mask.

Programming Language Used: Python

Approach: In this project a Machine learing Algorithm Called Logistic Regression is used.
	  Here Logistic Regression Algorithm is used for Binary Classification i.e, to classify whether a person is wearing a mask or not.
	  
Training and Testing the Model: The logistic Regression Model is Trained using 450 images of which 225 images are of Masked Human faces and 
                                225 images are of unmasked human face images.
 	                        Model is tested using 150 Images in which 75 images are masked and 75 images are unmasked.
                                The test accuracy was 92.10 percentage.


Process:          
            Data Preprocessing:
      
                  1. First the following libraries need to be imported :-
 								-numpy (for dealing with multi dimentional arrays)
							        -pandas (for dealing with the dataframes)
                                                                -cv2  (opencv a computer vision library for real time face detection)
                                                                -sklearn (machine learning library to get the ML models)
                   

                  2. Then load all the images, then convert them in a numpy array
                     and append the each numpy array of the each image into the pandas data frame.
                     Then convert the data frame of the image data into a csv file and save the file.
                     (this is csv file once saved can be used direclty without loading the images again and again)
                  
                  3.Then create a data frame containg the actual outputs accordingly
             
             Training and Testing Process:
                         
                  1.Split the data frame of the images into training and testing sets ( That are training image data (x_train),
                                                                                        image labels or actual outputs(y_train), 
                                                                                        testing image data (x_test), 
                                                                                        image labels or actual ouputs(y_test) )
                  2.Then calling the sklearn's logistic regression model for the training process.
                  
                  3.Testing the model on the test data and finding the test accuracy.
          
             Real Time masked face detection Process:
                 
                  1.First the haarcascade file (that is haarcascade_frontalface_default need to be loaded using the opencv's cascadeclassifier function)
               
                  2.Capturing the video using the system camera(web cam) with the help of opencv.
  
                  3.detecting the faces and resizing the detected faces into 64 x 64 pixels.
 
                  4.The detected faces data in converted into a and reshaped into a 1 x 12288 size pandas dataframe.

                  5.Then logistic Model is called by passing the image dataframe as argument.

                  6.Then model will predict the output if the person is wearing a face mask the output is predicted as "1" and a Green Color Rectangle 
                    is drawn around the face of the person, It is also shown as "Mask Detected" on the face of the person in the real time video.
                    Else if person is not wearing a face mask the output is predicted as "0" and a Red Colored Rectangle 
                    is drawn around the face of the person, It is also shown as "No Mask Detected" on the face of the person in the real time video. 
                    

                  
                    


